GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Hillary Clinton takes a break
from campaigning after a
pneumonia
diagnosis -- why both
candidates' health is playing a
major role this presidential
election.
GWEN IFILL: I travel to Colorado
to talk to voters in the most
Republican area of the
state.
MAN: Well, the choices
are dismal, I think.
It's just kind of a weird time,
a weird election, sort of sad in
a sense, I guess.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: deep
corruption in the world's
youngest nation.
A report reveals South Sudan's
leaders profiting from the
country's strife.
GWEN IFILL: And
Rethinking College.
The first installment of our new
series looks at the first urban
work college in the country.
It's remaking its mission with
a football-field-turned-farm.
MICHAEL SORRELL, President, Paul
Quinn College: Our students are
getting two forms of education.
They're getting a rigorous
liberal arts training, and
they're also getting real world
work experience.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The questions are
swirling in the presidential
campaign this evening:
How much do voters know about
the candidates' health, and how
much should they know?
The issue leaped to the
fore in the last 24 hours.
WOMAN: She was diagnosed
with pneumonia on Friday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The cable news
banners told the story, Hillary
Clinton's health front
and center, after she appeared
to stumble when she abruptly
left Sunday's 9/11 ceremony
in New York City.
Hours later, her doctor said the
68-year-old Democratic nominee
had been diagnosed with
pneumonia last Friday.
The Clinton campaign pledged
today that more information on
her health is forthcoming.
BRIAN FALLON, Clinton Campaign
Spokesman: We're going to be
releasing that to further
put to rest any lingering
concerns about what you saw
yesterday.
It really is the case that there
is no other undisclosed
condition.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton scrapped
a California trip, and instead
planned to phone in to a
San Francisco
fund-raiser tonight.
And late today, she tweeted:
"I'm feeling fine and getting
better."
That left running mate Tim Kaine
to take up the issue in Dayton,
Ohio.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate: I have
just been on the campaign since
July
22.
Hillary Clinton has been on
the trail for 18 months.
Her energy staggers me.
I have a hard time
keeping up with her.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
Republican Donald Trump was
restrained in his reaction.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: But I just hope that
she gets well, and gets
back on the trail.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump has
released little about his own
health, but promised today he
will
be putting out more
information as well.
DONALD TRUMP: This last
week, I took a physical.
And I will be releasing
when the numbers come in.
Hopefully, they're
going to be good.
I think they're
I feel great.
But when the numbers come in, I
will be releasing very, very
specific numbers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump's main
focus today was a different
issue: Clinton's Friday night
comments about his supporters.
It's fodder for a new
Trump campaign ad.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: You
could put half of Trump's
supporters into
what I call the basket of
deplorables, the racist, sexist,
homophobic, xenophobic,
Islamophobic,
you name it.
NARRATOR: People like you,
you, and you, deplorable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it was fodder
for Trump himself on the
campaign trail today during
a speech in Baltimore.
DONALD TRUMP: We have the
support of cops, and soldiers,
carpenters and welders, the
young and the old, and millions
of working-class families.
These were among the countless
Americans that Hillary Clinton
called deplorable, irredeemable,
and un-American.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump's next
stop, one of the battleground
states, North Carolina, this
evening.
We will examine the issue of
presidential candidates' health
more fully after the news
summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: a cease-fire in Syria
negotiated by the U.S. and
Russia
is now officially in force.
It took effect at sunset,
although government attacks
continued in the city of Aleppo.
Meanwhile, Syrian President
Bashar al-Assad appeared in a
recaptured Damascus suburb,
and insisted he means to control
the whole country again.
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, President of
Syria (through translator): The
Syrian state is determined
to recover every area from the
terrorists, to restore safety
and security, to rebuild,
to rebuild the infrastructure,
to rebuild whatever is destroyed
by all means.
We call upon all Syrians to
move towards reconciliation.
GWEN IFILL: A number of rebel
groups expressed misgivings
about the agreement, including
over how it would be enforced.
Later, Secretary of State
John Kerry defended the deal.
He even talked of approving
Syrian strikes against al-Qaida
militants once known as the
al-Nusra Front.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: Assad is not supposed to
be bombing the opposition
because there is a cease-fire.
Now, he is allowed and will be
to target Nusra, but that would
be on strikes that are agreed
upon with Russia and
the United States.
GWEN IFILL: That would mark the
first U.S. cooperation with the
Assad government since
the Syrian civil war began.
Within hours, the State
Department walked it back,
saying there is no such
provision
in the agreement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: China today
rejected U.S. calls that it do
more to stop North Korea's
nuclear
program.
It came days after the North
conducted a fifth nuclear test.
In Beijing, the foreign ministry
said Washington stoked the
tensions, and should bear the
brunt
of dealing with it.
HUA CHUNYING, Spokeswoman,
Chinese Ministry of Foreign
Affairs (through translator):
The
nub of the North Korean nuclear
issue is not in China, but in
the United States.
The U.S. should earnestly work
on a tangible and effective
solution.
There is an old saying in China:
Whoever started the trouble
should end it.
Thus, the U.S. should take
on its due responsibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Chinese
spokeswoman also voiced doubts
about U.S. calls for new
sanctions
against the North.
Meanwhile, South Korea warned
that the North is ready to set
off another nuclear blast
at any time.
GWEN IFILL: North Korea is
reeling from disastrous flooding
after a typhoon hit late last
month.
A U.N. report says the storm
killed at least 130 people and
destroyed thousands of homes.
North Korean state TV today
showed footage of recovery
efforts.
Workers cleared debris and
worked to repair railway lines.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the
Philippines, outspoken President
Rodrigo Duterte is now demanding
the U.S. withdraw all troops
from his country's south.
The U.S. has advisers there
working with Philippine troops
against pro-al-Qaida fighters.
Today, in Manila, Duterte blamed
the American presence for
inflaming Islamist groups.
RODRIGO DUTERTE, Philippine
President (through translator):
There are a lot of Americans,
white people there,
and they have to go.
The conflict there will only get
worse if they see American
soldiers, and there will
be more bloodshed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Duterte said the
bad blood goes back to U.S.
efforts to stamp out Muslim
rebellions in the early 1900's,
when the Philippines was a U.S.
colony.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, newly discovered
documents show the sugar
industry began funding
research decades ago to dismiss
links between sugar and heart
disease.
The journal "JAMA Internal
Medicine" today published an
analysis of correspondence
between
the industry and
Harvard researchers.
It said the resulting studies
successfully cast doubt about
the hazards of sucrose, while
promoting fat as the culprit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And soccer
injuries are soaring among
American children.
A study in the journal
"Pediatrics" finds the number
treated in emergency rooms
jumped
78 percent between
1990 and 2014.
It was fueled, in
part, by concussions.
Researchers at the Nationwide
Children's Hospital in Columbus,
Ohio, say that it's also due
to soccer's growing popularity.
GWEN IFILL: Wall Street
recovered some today from
Friday's big losses.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 239 points to close at
18325.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 86 points
and the S&P 500 added 31.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour": the debate over
the public's right to know
about presidential nominees'
health; lifelong Republicans
rethinking their loyalty in the
traditionally swing state of
Colorado; calling out South
Sudanese leaders for getting
rich
off the country's
troubles; and much more.
Now a closer look at just how
much the public has a right to
know about the health of the
American president or a
presidential candidate, and what
earlier presidents have and have
not disclosed about their
personal health histories.
For that, we turn to
Dr. Howard Markel.
He's director of the Center for
the History of Medicine at the
University of Michigan.
He's also author of a number of
books on health and infectious
diseases.
Dr. Markel, welcome.
Hillary Clinton's campaign says
that her pneumonia is not
severe.
Just how serious
can pneumonia be?
DR.
HOWARD MARKEL, Director, Center
for the History of Medicine,
University of Michigan: Well,
pneumonia can be quite serious.
People can die of it.
They used to call it the old
man's friend in the years before
antibiotics.
But now with taking antibiotics,
taking care of yourself and
resting, it is quite an easy
thing to treat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We saw -- I guess
it was just reported this
afternoon on Politico that
Hillary
Clinton's staff is saying she
doesn't prefer to drink water
often.
Could that have contributed
to what happened yesterday?
DR.
HOWARD MARKEL: Absolutely.
Think about it.
You're tired, you're sick,
you're out in the sun, which
dehydrates us all, whether we're
aware of it or not.
And that could very well have
been what caused that wobbly
step that everyone has seen and
talked about today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you, both of these campaigns,
both Trump and Clinton
are now saying, in the next few
days, they are going to be
releasing fuller medical
histories,
we're going to know more
about their medical story.
What do the American voters
have a right to know?
What should people know in order
to know whether these two
individuals are healthy or not?
DR.
HOWARD MARKEL: Well, I
think it's very important.
And I think American voters do
have the right to know about the
health of the people who
are running for the most
powerful job in the world.
It is very easy to present one's
health history, and yet it's
become very tangled and diffuse,
just like people's tax returns.
But I think both these pieces of
information are valid for people
to ask about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so what are
some aspects of their health
that you think should be
disclosed
when they do put
these histories out?
DR.
HOWARD MARKEL: Well, I think
just the basic top-to-bottom
physical examination, mental
health examination, a recording
of the medications they may or
may not take, past illnesses,
illnesses that may run in their
family, a general medical
history.
Now, remember, this hasn't
really been done all that much
since 1992.
And it was Paul Tsongas who
didn't tell the American people
precisely about his
non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma.
He said he was cured.
He wasn't.
Had he won the rest of the
campaign and run for president,
he probably would have been
quite ill during his presidency.
So these things do matter.
And I think it's one more piece
of information that we as voters
have a right to know about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, of course,
there are other examples as
well.
People think of John F.
Kennedy, Addison's disease.
DR.
HOWARD MARKEL: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a number
of other presidents.
DR.
HOWARD MARKEL: Yes.
And really back to Kennedy, or
Roosevelt or even Woodrow
Wilson's health, these were an
era where medicine could not do
all that much for these serious
diseases.
Today, more and more people are
living full and healthy lives
with chronic illnesses.
And I have got to tell you,
having turned 50 myself quite a
few years ago, the warranty
on your body runs out at that
point, and we all have problems
with our bodies.
And so Mrs. Clinton's pneumonia
is community-acquired.
It's a very normal thing to do
to contract, particularly when
you're shaking hands, and
working a grueling campaign, and
flying on airplanes and stuff.
And I have to tell you that most
doctors would give the advice,
why don't you take a break
from this grueling campaign for
a day or so and rest, like any
human being whose body
gets sick?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
you mentioned age.
Hillary Clinton is 68.
Donald Trump is 70.
How much is age a factor in
this, as you describe, grueling
job they both want to take on?
DR.
HOWARD MARKEL: Well, it's hard
to say with each 70-year-old.
One 70-year-old may be quite
fatigued by this type of a
schedule.
Other people -- and it seems Mr.
Trump and Mrs. Clinton are those
types -- are energized
by it.
So, it really is a case-by-case
person -- case-by-case
situation.
But, you know, most people over
65 should get a pneumonia shot
and also should get a
flu shot every year.
So that's something you can do.
But it's hard to say.
These sounds like extremely
energetic people.
They sound like very
healthy people.
I'm a little puzzled why they
just don't tell us what's going
on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, again, as
we prepare to see whatever these
campaigns release, how
will we know we're
getting the full story?
DR.
HOWARD MARKEL: That is
difficult, and we don't know.
And particularly the briefer the
report is, there may be stuff
that you're not seeing,
or you could get a data dump,
like John McCain did a few years
back where he released thousands
of pages of his medical history
and gave journalists only about
three or four hours to review
them.
I'm a medical professor, and I
couldn't do it in that time.
So there's different ways that
people can be somewhat shifty or
less than transparent
with their health data.
I think it's high time in this
modern era of great medicine and
great health prevention
that our presidential candidates
just tell us what is going on in
their bodies.
And we can make those decisions
one way or the other.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will be
looking for what each campaign
has to say in the coming
days.
Dr. Howard Markel, we thank you.
DR.
HOWARD MARKEL: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on our Web
site, you can find a guide to
pneumonia, what causes it
and what makes it a potentially
dangerous illness.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: For more on how
health issues are dogging
Hillary Clinton and raising
questions
of transparency for both
candidates, it's time for
Politics Monday with Tamara
Keith
of NPR and Susan Page,
Washington bureau chief for USA
Today.
Tam, we just heard Dr. Markel
say the warranty begins to run
out after 50, and he doesn't
understand why people just don't
tell us what their issues are.
How did health become
central to this campaign?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well, Hillary Clinton did
have a coughing fit about
a week ago on the campaign trail
that interrupted a press
conference and also later --
earlier
interrupted a rally
where she was speaking.
That was -- there was already a
lot circulating about her health
that was completely
unsubstantiated,
a lot of rumors, conspiracy
theories, and Donald Trump
talking about her stamina.
So this was floating in the
ether, when, yesterday, at the
9/11 commemoration, she faltered
as
she was leaving.
Her knees buckled and she had
trouble getting into her van.
She took off in that van.
And the press wasn't
allowed to follow.
And about 90 minutes later, the
campaign said, well, she's at
Chelsea Clinton's house.
She's feeling better,
and she was overheated.
GWEN IFILL: Then
hours later said...
TAMARA KEITH: Then
hours later...
GWEN IFILL: Well, it seemed like
a long time if you were covering
it, I'm sure.
For those of who weren't
paying as close attention...
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: Well, it
was about 5:00 p.m.
GWEN IFILL: It was
the end of the day.
TAMARA KEITH: It was
the end of the day...
GWEN IFILL: Right.
TAMARA KEITH: ... when the
doctor, her doctor, released a
statement saying she was
overheated,
dehydrated, and, oh, by the way,
on Friday, three days earlier,
was diagnosed with pneumonia,
and they hadn't told
anyone about that before.
GWEN IFILL: Well, that's
the point, Susan.
Was this really about -- is our
concern really about her health
or is it about the fact of
the failure to disclose
in a timely fashion?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today: I think both
things are issues.
I think she will now need to
come out and show that she's
healthy and vigorous and has
stamina.
She has -- the fact that she was
diagnosed with pneumonia, and we
didn't know about it,
and had this incident caught on
a video has legitimized some of
the critiques that Trump
and Rudy Giuliani in particular
have been making that she's --
that there's some question
about her health.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Donald Trump,
who has not released his...
SUSAN PAGE: His own
health records.
That's right.
GWEN IFILL: OK, just
to make that point.
SUSAN PAGE: Yes, absolutely.
But I think her failure to
disclose it is also an issue.
And it goes to a different
vulnerability she has, which is,
is she straightforward with
the Americans whose
votes she wants to get?
GWEN IFILL: And they say there
is a higher standard for the
woman candidate.
That's what the
Clinton people say.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
They do.
They do say that.
And they say that they are going
to meet that higher standard.
They both -- say that they
have already released more.
They have released more health
records, they have released more
tax records than Donald
Trump.
They say they will release yet
more health records to prove
that this pneumonia isn't
part of something larger.
But there was a tweet today from
David Axelrod, the adviser to
President Obama back when he
was running for president, that
really sums up what Susan is
talking about.
He says: "Antibiotics can
take care of pneumonia.
What's the cure for an unhealthy
penchant for privacy that
repeatedly creates unnecessary
problems?"
GWEN IFILL: OK.
That's privacy.
Let's talk about something that
she did in full view of everyone
on Friday night.
She gave a speech at a
fund-raiser given for her by a
gay and lesbian group.
And she said this:
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: To just
be grossly generalistic, you
could
put half of Trump's supporters
into what I call the basket of
deplorables, right, the
racist, sexist, homophobic,
xenophobic, Islamophobic, you
name it.
GWEN IFILL: Now, here's the
other thing that she also said.
She said: "But the other basket
-- and I know this because I see
friends from all over America
here -- I see friends from
Florida, from Georgia, and South
Carolina, and Texas, as well you
know, New York and California"
-- she is basically going on to
say that this -- "I'm sorry.
I didn't finish reading it.
I will finish reading it: "But
that other basket of people are
people who feel that
the government has let them
down, nobody cares about them,
nobody worries about what
happens
to their lives and their futures
and they are just desperate for
change."
A lot of attention, Susan, given
to what she said about the Trump
-- the half of Trump
supporters who are deplorables,
but not a lot given to the --
what she said about the
other half.
SUSAN PAGE: First of all, if a
candidate is starting a sentence
with let's be grossly
generalistic...
GWEN IFILL: She should stop.
SUSAN PAGE: ... you do not
want to finish that sentence.
That is never a good idea.
And it is true she was trying to
make a more complicated point,
as Barack Obama at a similar
moment eight years ago, when he
talked about some voters
clinging to guns and religion.
He was trying to make a larger
point about the frustration and
angst that voters feel.
But what came across, I think,
was kind of an elitist statement
at a fancy fund-raiser
talking about millions of
Americans who are support her
opponent.
And, by the way, if she wins the
White House, as she hopes to do,
these are Americans she
will be seeking to represent.
GWEN IFILL: So, here is the
thing I'm curious about.
Is what she said true, or is the
way she said it the problem?
She said that half of Donald
Trump's supporters -- and half
of them do believe that Muslims
should be banned.
Half of them do believe
that blacks are lazy.
Half of them do say they believe
many of the more offensive
things that he has said from
the stump.
Is what she said wrong?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, what she
said about what she said, she
released a statement that was
described as sort
of walking it back.
She said, I shouldn't have said
half and I shouldn't have been
so grossly generalistic.
But the challenge, the real
challenge, is when you start a
conversation with people
by labeling them.
And instead she could easily
talk about the behavior.
She could talk about Donald
Trump retweeting white
nationalist memes or things like
that.
She can do the thing that she's
done many times before, without
targeting the voters
and without creating a sound
bite that immediately shows up
in a Donald Trump ad.
GWEN IFILL: And instead she's
given him the ammunition to
accuse her of intolerance.
SUSAN PAGE: And that's been one
of the strongest issues she's
had against him, including with
some voters who traditionally
vote Republican and are uneasy
about him.
I think there are a few
supporters of Donald Trump who
are deplorable.
David Duke is deplorable.
Other Trump supporters may have
views you think are deplorable,
but they are not deplorable.
They're Americans who are
looking at this election and
trying to make the right
decision
for them and their families.
And candidates need
to acknowledge that.
GWEN IFILL: It's the other
basket I guess she was talking
about.
Let's talk about this wonderful
piece of -- wonderful in that it
was a great piece of reporting
in The Washington Post.
David Fahrenthold from The
Washington Post went through
everything that -- went through
the Trump charities,
essentially, and found out that
-- a couple of interesting
things
just by going through public
records, among them, that Donald
Trump raises money -- raises
other people's money and then
doles it out under the name of
the Trump charities.
Kind of remarkable.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, and that
Donald Trump gets credit for it,
but that he hasn't put his
own money in for several years.
This reporting is really solid.
This is the kind of reporting
that we all should aspire to,
where you go through the
records, you're methodical.
He's been calling hundreds of
these charities, trying to find
out which donations were given
and from what pots of money.
Very impressive reporting.
GWEN IFILL: And, in one case,
actually solicited -- broke the
law by using some of that money
to buy a 6-foot-tall painting of
himself at auction, or Melania
did, I suspect.
The question is, how does
something that, which maybe on a
day like today, how does
that compare to the Clinton
Foundation questions that have
been raised?
SUSAN PAGE: You know what's
remarkable is that these are
devastating -- this is a
devastating
story that's solidly
backed by public records.
It's not some leak from
some anonymous source.
But it seems to have very much
lost impact than the Clinton
Foundation stories have toward
Hillary Clinton.
And I'm not 100
percent sure why.
GWEN IFILL: Susan Page of USA
Today, Tamara Keith of NPR,
thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Sticking with
politics, Colorado is a state
typically considered a crucial
battleground in
presidential elections.
But this year, Hillary Clinton
is polling well ahead of rival
Donald Trump.
This has caused no small amount
of concern for Republican voters
in the reddest part
of the state.
I spent the weekend
talking to them.
A crisp, sunny football
afternoon at the U.S. Air Force
Academy.
Football is easy.
Air Force crushed Georgia State.
But politics is more
complicated, especially this
year, in the heart of one of the
most
conservative counties
in Colorado.
Eli Bremer, a former local party
chairman, supports nominee
Donald Trump now, but only
after his first and second
choices, Marco Rubio and Jeb
Bush, flamed out.
And you ended up with Trump
because he's the nominee or
because he was your third-best
choice?
ELI BREMER, Former Local
Republican Party Chairman: I
have always found him an
interesting
candidate.
Interesting can be good.
Interesting can be bad.
But when he became the nominee,
I said I can support his
candidate.
I don't have to like
everything about him.
But I like a number
of things about him.
You have got evangelicals and
religious voters who've always
consistently been on the
conservative
side.
In this election, there's
questions, will they show up for
Trump?
GWEN IFILL: The questions, in
Colorado, a state in the habit
of picking the winner,
go broad and deep.
There are loyal, Republicans
like Dan and Tami Scase (ph),
military retirees, who feel
it's their duty to vote.
This year, they are stuck.
MAN: Well, the choices
are dismal, I think.
It's just kind of a weird time,
a weird election, sort of sad in
a sense, I guess, tragic, but
mostly it's just weird.
That's what I think.
GWEN IFILL: What do
you think, Tami?
WOMAN: I think it's goofy,
because we have no choice.
We have -- maybe the
Libertarians are coming up.
I wouldn't be surprised if this
is a really close election.
GWEN IFILL: Because you would
vote for a third choice, rather
than Hillary Clinton or Donald
Trump?
WOMAN: I would.
GWEN IFILL: The Scases are
members of a big club made up of
some of the most conflicted
Republicans in the country.
You would think that in a place
with five separate military
installations that went
slam dunk for Mitt Romney four
years ago, Donald Trump would be
overwhelmingly popular.
But here in deep-red El Paso
County, his support appears far
softer than expected.
KARON MCCORMICK, Former Romney
Supporter: I was an active
precinct leader
GWEN IFILL: Karon McCormick
is part of the reason why.
In 2012, she was devoted
to Mitt Romney.
KARON MCCORMICK:
I love that man.
I love Mitt Romney.
GWEN IFILL: Assembling 3,500
lawn signs in her backyard shed.
This year?
KARON MCCORMICK: I have been a
lifetime Republican and have
switched to independent because
Mr.
Trump is just too embarrassing
for me to support.
He doesn't represent
the party of Lincoln.
And I don't want to lower my
standards to dirt level to
support him just to beat Hillary
Clinton.
So I will be supporting her.
GWEN IFILL: Do your Republican
friends look at you and think
that you have lost your mind?
KARON MCCORMICK: Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
KARON MCCORMICK: I have been
called every name in the book, a
traitor and everything
else.
But I think he would be
dangerous as a president.
GWEN IFILL: Colorado may
not be a tossup this year.
MAN: I'm calling on behalf of
the Donald Trump and Mike Pence
campaign.
GWEN IFILL: But Trump, who
campaigned in Colorado Springs
this summer, sees an
opportunity.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: I just want to tell
you that I'm going to
be in Colorado a lot, because --
because there's no way we
shouldn't win this state.
These are great people, heavy
military, tremendous respect for
their police and law and order.
That's me.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Tom Cronin, who
teaches political science at
Colorado College, has a term for
the Republicans who don't want
to vote for Trump: homeless.
So, in this area where we are,
which is a reliably conservative
area of the state, evangelically
and the military population,
does he have to do very well
here in order to offset that?
TOM CRONIN, Colorado
College: Correct.
El Paso County and some nearby
counties, as well as rural
Colorado, is decidedly
Republican.
And he will do well, but he
probably won't do well enough to
offset Denver, Boulder,
and the suburbs of Denver.
GWEN IFILL: That matches up with
recent Colorado polling that
shows Clinton with a comfortable
lead.
DAVID FLAHERTY, Magellan
Strategies: I really think
there's an opening here for Gary
Johnson.
GWEN IFILL: David Flaherty
runs the Magellan Poll.
DAVID FLAHERTY: Our latest poll
shows Hillary up by five points,
41 to 36 percent right
now.
Honestly, what's going is, we're
getting about 13 percent going
for the Libertarian, Gary
Johnson, unlike here in 2012,
where if you were not thrilled
with Mitt Romney, you kind
of had nowhere to go.
But, with Gary Johnson gaining
traction in our latest survey,
he's getting almost one-quarter
of the unaffiliated voters here.
So, I feel that those voters
that perhaps would normally go
into Hillary's column, or
lean into her column, they
actually have a viable option at
this time in Gary Johnson.
GWEN IFILL: Among that 13
percent, hard-core Republicans,
like intelligence analyst and
father of three Jason Calhoun,
who knows he will vote for
neither Trump nor Clinton.
JASON CALHOUN, Gary Johnson
supporter: I can't think of a
perfect candidate at this point.
So, you essentially
have three options.
You have three people that are
going to be on the ballot in all
50 states.
And you really have to
decide between one of them.
And I think that it's -- I'm not
saying that the two-party system
is rigged and corrupt
and broken or anything.
I just think it's time for
a third voice in there.
And I think that Governor
Johnson offers that best
opportunity for us to start
hearing each
other again.
GWEN IFILL: That is not to say
that Trump will lose El Paso
County.
PASTOR MARK COWART, Church of
All Nations: God has a plan for
your life.
GWEN IFILL: Staunch Trump
supporter Mark Cowart, pastor of
the Church of All Nations, a
megachurch
with five locations, feels
politics should return to the
pulpit.
PASTOR MARK COWART: We can pray,
lord, save America, but we'd
better open our mouths.
GWEN IFILL: But Cowart Also
acknowledges that many in his
own congregation are uneasy.
PASTOR MARK COWART: There is a
lot of confusion and conflict in
this election.
I have never seen
anything quite like it.
You know, it's interesting.
I have heard a lot of things.
I will tell you some of the
things I have heard: "I don't
like him."
So, the way I respond to that
is, since when do we have to
like our candidate to elect
a candidate?
So, sometimes, the lord will
choose candidates that may not
fit everybody's criteria, but
they're capable candidates.
And I like to remind people
we're not electing a pastor in
chief.
This is a commander in chief.
GWEN IFILL: Karon McCormick, the
Romney-turned-Clinton supporter,
got three Trump fund-raising
pitches
in her mail in one day last
week, a sign that no one is
writing this state off, not yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
struggling urban college
rethinks its mission and puts
its students to work, plus,
rebuilding an iconic Afghan
palace brought to ruin by years
of war.
South Sudan
But, first: South Sudan is the
world's newest country, gaining
independence from Sudan in
2011.
But, two years later, civil war
broke out in the small East
African nation.
Though a peace agreement was
signed in 2015, sporadic
fighting continues.
Millions have been displaced,
while rival leaders fight for
power and the country's
oil and mineral wealth.
A two-year-long investigation
into those leaders and their
allies revealed billions have
been
looted from the country.
"NewsHour" producer P.J.
Tobia has our story
And a warning: Some viewers may
find some of the imagery
disturbing.
P.J. TOBIA: Small, poor and
dangerous, the U.N. has called
South Sudan one of the most
horrendous human rights
situations in the world.
Fighters loyal to the president,
Salva Kiir, have been battling
those backing former Vice
President Riek Machar for
most of the last four years.
Caught in the crossfire are
Sudan's impoverished civilians.
More than two million South
Sudanese have been displaced by
the fighting.
Tens of thousands
have been killed.
The U.N. found that, in just six
months last year, 1,300 women
were raped by fighters in
one South Sudanese state alone.
A report released today by The
Sentry, a rights group in
Washington, accuses the leaders
who've
orchestrated this brutality of
making billions off the
conflict.
Actor George Clooney wrote
the foreword to the report.
"Hotel Rwanda" star Don Cheadle
also works with The Sentry.
Both were at the National Press
Club this morning to talk about
the investigation.
GEORGE CLOONEY, Actor: This
is pretty explosive stuff.
We're talking about the
president and the ousted vice
president, along with all of
their
generals, that we're able to
prove without any question that
not only are they committing
these crimes which they have
already been accused of, but
that they're profiting off
of it.
P.J. TOBIA: The report outlines
how South Sudan's political
leaders, generals and their
families have used the chaos of
war to generate vast sums of
wealth.
They have built mansions across
the world, from Uganda and Kenya
to Australia.
That young woman flashing the
peace sign from the sunroof of a
BMW?
She's the daughter of a former
general, a former general whose
state salary was never
more than 45,000 U.S. dollars.
This man is the stepson of
another South Sudanese general.
He calls himself
the young tycoon.
His Facebook photos show a life
of privilege unimaginable to
most South Sudanese.
Here, he narrates a tour of a
presidential suite at a luxury
hotel in Las Vegas.
JOHN PRENDERGAST, Founding
Director, The Enough Project:
So, it's like a mafia in some
ways.
A mafia has taken
over the state.
P.J. TOBIA: John Prendergast is
the director of the Enough
Project, a rights group that
oversees The Sentry group.
JOHN PRENDERGAST: The mafia we
see in the movies, that is
shooting a few people.
In South Sudan, tens of
thousands of people have died in
this war, with horrific
atrocities,
mass rape, child soldier
recruitment., all the worst of
the worst of the human rights
abuses that we hear
about globally.
And this is how
they stay in power.
P.J. TOBIA: Prendergast says
much of the corruption happens
through government contracts
granted
to the family members of
political and military leaders.
JOHN PRENDERGAST: They put their
family members as share owners
of the companies, and then
they gets, contracts from the
state to allow those companies
to operate.
So, it's a backdoor way out of
the national treasury to
privately enrich yourself and
your family.
P.J. TOBIA: Meanwhile, the war
helps the rich get richer.
JOHN PRENDERGAST: If you control
the government institutions,
well, you have access to the
army.
You have access to
the state budget.
You can buy weapons.
You can steal as
much as you want.
You can issue contracts to your
own company that you have set
up.
It's in the context of war that
a certain group of people become
fabulously wealthy,
while the rest of the
country is immiserated.
P.J. TOBIA: As a result, two
bitter enemies, President Kiir
and his rival, Riek Machar,
own luxury villas just a short
distance from one another in the
exclusive Lavington neighborhood
of Nairobi, Kenya, all made
possible by international
enablers, says Prendergast.
JOHN PRENDERGAST: Bankers, and
businessmen, arms dealers, all
kinds of different lawyers,
shipping agents, accountants.
There are a number of different
professions that are gladly at
the service of dictators
and war criminals, because
they pay an extra premium.
P.J. TOBIA: Clooney, Cheadle and
Prendergast came to the White
House this afternoon for
a meeting with President Obama.
They want the president to sign
an executive order targeting the
international assets of
South Sudan's leaders.
Such an order would make it
difficult for these leaders to
access the international
banking system, move cash, buy
property and do business across
borders.
JOHN PRENDERGAST: If we were
able to create that standard
over time, where real
consequences
would accrue to people who would
be willing to kill by the
thousands to stay in power
or to gain power, it would have
a -- I believe, a chilling
effect on mass atrocities being
committed in the future.
P.J. TOBIA: South Sudan's
leaders keep their money
offshore.
That makes them vulnerable.
JOHN PRENDERGAST: Because they
have this vulnerability of
offshoring their assets, we can
use existing
policy tools to go
after that money.
P.J. TOBIA: It's a strategy
that's been used to target
terrorists post-9/11.
JOHN PRENDERGAST: We got to
raise the cost of doing business
with war criminals.
P.J. TOBIA: Corrupt leaders of
war-torn countries are nothing
new.
But applying this strategy
to isolate them is new.
It might be a way to begin
holding these mass killers
responsible for their actions.
P.J. Tobia, "PBS
NewsHour," in Washington.
GWEN IFILL: Now we begin a
special week-long look at the
ways that some schools,
educators
and leaders are trying to
transform higher education.
The goal?
To prepare students for
the modern work force.
The series is called Rethinking
College, part of PBS' Spotlight
Education initiative, which
features special programming
examining today's challenges.
Tonight, Hari Sreenivasan visits
Dallas, where an innovative
college president is growing
a new kind of student.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At a Texas
college, a football field that
was turned into a farm.
MAN: We need to harvest about
10 pounds of radishes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Tigers of
Paul Quinn College lost more
football games than they
won on this field.
So, nine years ago, when the
historically black college on
the South Side of Dallas
was in financial crisis and had
a 1 percent graduation rate, a
new president turned everything
over, including the
football field.
So, did you envision this when
you first saw the football field
and the...
MICHAEL SORRELL, President,
Paul Quinn College: No, no.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael
Sorrell had no experience
running a college.
He had been a lawyer and White
House special assistant, but he
knew Paul Quinn couldn't
afford a football program.
MICHAEL SORRELL: There's more
than one field of dreams, all
right?
Why should we tie everyone's
future to athletic success?
HARI SREENIVASAN: He turned the
football field into an organic
farm that generates more than
20,000 pounds of organic
vegetables every year, veggies
that make it into high-end
restaurants
and into the Dallas
Cowboys' stadium.
MICHAEL SORRELL: I think
this has saved our school.
It saved it because it changed
the narrative of the
institution.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The farm has
become a symbol for a remade
Paul Quinn College.
MICHAEL SORRELL: We're the first
urban work college in the
country.
And so our students learn what
it means to be effective and to
have job skills and work
skills.
VINCENT OWOSENI, Student: The
app that records our work
college hours is called UAttend
(ph).
HARI SREENIVASAN: Students are
assigned jobs from day one.
VINCENT OWOSENI: So when I punch
in, the dean of work college
should be able to track that
I punched in.
And now it's recorded that
I'm punched into work.
Every student here has to work
150 hours to fulfill their work
tuition.
JAMES HUNTER, Farm Manager, Paul
Quinn College: Our goal is for
them to be somewhere between
nickel size to
quarter size around.
HARI SREENIVASAN: James
Hunter is the farm manager.
JAMES HUNTER: Most of the
students that work on the farm,
they're not going to be farmers,
and I don't want
them to be farmers.
I want them to pursue whatever
they're interested in.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Vincent
Owoseni is a business management
major.
VINCENT OWOSENI: One basic
principle about the farm is
supply and demand.
Let's say if a plant is going to
be in demand around Thanksgiving
time, around November,
we're going to plant
that late summertime.
It helps you to understand the
bigger picture of the farm,
knowing about the customer,
knowing
about the economy of the farm.
JAMES HUNTER: So, Vincent, for
instance, but we want to focus
more on how to read financials
or a balance sheet, what it
takes when you're planning
expenses or long-term revenue
strategy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Unless
students are on the farm, they
wear business attire, or face a
steep fine.
MICHAEL SORRELL: You want to run
back and get your dress shoes,
so that you can not
get fined?
HARI SREENIVASAN:
What's the fine?
MICHAEL SORRELL: So, there's
two ways to handle the fine.
You can either do 400
prayer squats or pay $200.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Four hundred
prayer squats for being out of
dress code?
MICHAEL SORRELL: It's better
than paying the fine.
Eighty-three percent of our
students are Pell
Grant-eligible, which means, by
and large,
that their families have a
dysfunctional relationship with
wealth and with work.
So if you have never been in an
environment where you have come
to understand the expectations
of a career, because all you
have ever seen is people be
underemployed or unemployed,
then how are you
going to learn that?
JENNIFER MORENO, Student:
Good morning, everyone.
My name is Jennifer Moreno.
I'm a freshman.
I'm from Ennis, Texas.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For their
first two years, Paul Quinn
students are assigned on-campus
jobs often ones that require
contact with the public.
The idea is to improve
communication and
problem-solving skills.
MICHAEL SORRELL: Our students
are getting two forms of
education.
They're getting a rigorous
liberal arts training, and
they're also getting real world
work experience.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But students
are not directly paid for their
work.
Instead, earnings go to the
college to pay down their
tuition.
STUDENT: This is where all
your classes will be held.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Freshman
Jennifer Moreno is a
first-generation student whose
parents
are from Mexico.
JENNIFER MORENO: With the work
program, they give you $5,000.
That goes toward your tuition.
Coming from a low-income family,
this was a great option.
MICHAEL SORRELL: The students
might spend their first two
years working on-campus, as
we make sure that they're
properly prepared to be
successful.
Then, the last two years,
they're working off-campus in
companies or other businesses
that are related to their
career aspirations.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Senior Destiny
Modeste is interning at
Slingshot, an advertising agency
in downtown Dallas.
Her employer pays Paul Quinn
College $7,500 per school year
for Destiny's work.
DESTINY MODESTE, Student: Having
the opportunity to work and help
pay your tuition at the same
time at an actual agency and see
what they do on a daily basis,
and then maybe, at the
end, they offered a job,
that's very important to me.
MICHAEL SORRELL: There is no
employment training program that
will cost as little as $15,000.
This is an investment in
improving the talent pool of
your company and your office.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So what's the
incentive for an employer to
keep that student around?
MICHAEL SORRELL: Well, don't
keep them around if they aren't
good enough, right?
Our responsibility to them is
provide a quality product.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Chris
Hawthorne, who runs the intern
program at Slingshot, says the
partnership with an historically
black college is important.
CHRIS HAWTHORNE, Slingshot: We
have, as an industry, in
advertising, struggled with
attracting
minorities to the
field of advertising.
So we started this
relationship with Paul Quinn.
We met Destiny, and
she was fantastic.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But as
important as career and college
are to Sorrell's vision, he also
pushes his students to
engage in community service.
MICHAEL SORRELL: We believe that
colleges have a fundamental
responsibility, if you're
located in an urban area, to
turn outward and address the
needs of the communities you
serve.
We are in a food desert.
There's no grocery
store for four miles.
Right?
I mean, that's real.
People don't have
access to healthy food.
I mean affordable, fresh
and healthy produce.
We decided we have the ability
to solve the problem, and we're
going to go solve the problem.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is that what
people come to college to learn?
MICHAEL SORRELL: Someone's going
to figure out the urban issues.
Why shouldn't it be the people
who came from those urban
communities that have a vested
interest in those neighborhoods?
HARI SREENIVASAN: In keeping
with that mission, the college
donates 10 percent of the
produce
from the farm, named WE over Me,
to the surrounding underserved
community.
VINCENT OWOSENI: If you look at
the need around you, and you
look at your resource, you can,
say, hey, I can use this space
right here to grow what my
community needs.
Where someone else sees
hopelessness, you see an
opportunity.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Dallas, for
the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
GWEN IFILL: And, tomorrow,
Hari's series continues with the
particular financial and
cultural
challenges Latino males face
when it comes to earning a
degree.
And online: While students have
asked colleges and universities
to do better in hiring more
professors of color,
institutions have struggled to
live up to their pledges.
Our partners at The Hechinger
Report explore why.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
we return to our coverage of the
15th anniversary of
the September 11 attacks
and the aftermath.
A decade-and-a-half after the
U.S. invasion, Afghanistan is
still rebuilding and heavily
dependent on international aid,
relying on other countries for
70 percent of its government
budget.
Still, Afghanistan is taking
steps to stand on its own.
One project on the outskirts of
Kabul is both a symbol of the
effort to rebuild the country
and a potent reminder
of national pride.
Special correspondent
Jennifer Glasse reports.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Mohammad Kabir
has lived in the shadow of the
Darul Aman Palace all
his life through years of
peace and decades of war.
King Amanullah Khan commissioned
the building of the Neoclassical
palace in the early 1920s,
a symbol of a modern,
progressive, independent
Afghanistan.
It took just over two years to
build and the king lived here
about as long, before he was
driven into exile in 1929
by a popular uprising.
Kabir, who says he's about 100,
used to play with the king's
children, then tended the
palace garden for most of his
adult life, until the mujahideen
war that followed the
1989 Soviet retreat
drove him away.
He returned four years ago, and
says it's a lot different than
when it stood in its
glory.
MOHAMMAD KABIR, Afghanistan
(through translator): Back then,
the garden was full of fruit
trees
and covered with grass.
Families came to picnic, listen
to music, and camp overnight.
JENNIFER GLASSE: A corner of the
gardens has been partially
restored, and there are grand
plans for it and the
rest of the palace.
In 2010, a professor and former
World Bank official named Ashraf
Ghani wrote that Darul
Aman was a palace of
abandoned dreams.
Now he is president, and trying
to make it the stuff of dreams
with an all-Afghan project
to restore it.
For three months, hundreds of
laborers have been taking down
ceilings, and carting out
rubble to make the
building safe.
That process could take
until the end of the year.
Architect Zabiullah
Suleimankhail is one of the
100-strong technical team that's
mapping
out the reconstruction.
There's been a lot of research.
ZABIULLAH SULEIMANKHAIL,
Architect: The bricks they have
used to build the palace had the
mark on them.
JENNIFER GLASSE: The mark
of the king, he says.
He is proud that the workers
here and the funds to pay for it
are all Afghan.
He says this project is a source
of national pride that shows
that Afghans can work on
their own.
ZABIULLAH SULEIMANKHAIL: When
you're looking to the palace,
you're envisioning about or
you're thinking about the
decades of war that Afghanistan
was faced with.
And now, when you want to build
or reconstruct this building,
it's really a point to great
and brighter future.
JENNIFER GLASSE: The building
also points to an ambitious
past, like the grand room
built by the king to house
the new parliament.
He wanted the Darul Aman Palace,
which means Abode of Peace, to
be the center of a new
city.
He was deposed before he
could make that happen.
President Ghani is using the
rebuilding process to reflect
his own view of what Afghanistan
should be.
So a quarter of the technical
staff are women, like structural
engineer Sofia Roshan.
It's her first job
out of college.
SOFIA ROSHAN, Structural
Engineer: It's very difficult
for -- especially for girls of
Afghanistan
to work as a structural engineer
or architectural engineer on the
big projects of Afghanistan,
especially palace.
And so that's that's a good
opportunity for us to work with
them and show the world that,
yes, we can do it.
JENNIFER GLASSE: They're hoping
to complete this in three to
five years at an estimated
cost right now of around $30
million, though planners say
costs could go 10 percent higher
or more, depending on how much
structural damage is discovered.
This isn't the first time that
Afghans have tried to restore
this palace.
About four years ago, the mayor
of Kabul launched a campaign and
called on Afghans to donate
whatever they could, from as
little as 20 cents to hundreds
of dollars.
And thousands of Afghans did,
but nobody knows where that
money went.
Lack of accountability has
fueled corruption for years
here.
Transparency International rates
Afghanistan one of world's worst
corruption offenders.
The head of Kabul's exchange
market says it is as big as
threat as the Taliban.
MAN (through translator): Inside
the government, we have some
criminals and warlords who are
always fighting to keep their
influence on the nation and
government.
And they use illegal
ways to stay in power.
They only care about their own
profits, not what benefits the
people or the government.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Afghanistan's
finance minister says the
government is aware of the
problem
and doing what it can.
EKLIL AHMAD HAKIMI, Minister of
Finance: I have identified at
least 20 very corrupt
individuals
within my ministry.
So, I just fired them.
Unfortunately, I regret
now why I fired them.
I should have put them in a jail
or in a detention center to
recover the stolen public money.
But I regret, up to now, we
don't have this kind of system.
JENNIFER GLASSE: He hopes a new
anti-corruption justice center
will fill that gap.
The Afghan government is trying
to support fruit and vegetable
sales and export.
Eighty percent of the population
is involved in agriculture, but
few make more than a subsistence
living.
It's the same problem about 100
miles north of the capital in
the Panjshir Valley, lots
of promise, but not much
support realizing it.
Deep inside a hillside, these
miners are hoping to strike it
rich.
They're looking for emeralds.
It's a basic operation.
Pretty much everything is done
by hand, except for the blasts
that help carve out the tunnels.
The dangers are considerable,
but so are the rewards.
One group recently found an
emerald that sold for $80,000.
Panjshir isn't the only place in
Afghanistan with possibilities
for mining.
There are metals, minerals and
gems all over the country that
could bring the government
billions of dollars.
But, in many cases, they don't
have the resources to get them
out of the ground or the
infrastructure
to take them to market.
Last Wednesday in Western
Afghanistan, Afghan and Iranian
officials came together to
inaugurate
a key step in building that
infrastructure, the first link
in a railway that eventually
will connect the Iranian seaport
of Chabahar to landlocked
Afghanistan.
This project has already
been delayed by seven years.
Afghans will be watching closely
to see whether this train line
to connect Afghanistan with
the wider world and reduce its
dependency on exporting through
Pakistan will really
be built.
Back at the palace, there's no
doubt that this project will be
completed.
They say the president is
keeping close track of it.
And they can't wait for
it to be finished.
ZABIULLAH SULEIMANKHAIL: I'm
really just looking forward to
that day, that a day will come
that we will face the palace,
and we will cut the ribbon, and
we will inaugurate the
place.
That will be the best
of my -- our life.
JENNIFER GLASSE: If that day
does come, then a new Afghan
leader will have renewed the
dream of a king who, a century
ago, wanted to show the world a
modern independent Afghanistan.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jennifer Glasse in Kabul.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On "Charlie Rose"
tonight: President Bill Clinton
weighs in on the Clinton
foundation and questions
about his wife's health.
The former president says she
stumbled because she was
dehydrated and that it's nothing
more
serious.
He says it has happened before
when she's become dehydrated and
that he doesn't think
he will be able to keep her from
campaigning for more than
another day.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, correspondent John
Yang checks in with the first of
two reports from the
crucial battleground
state of Ohio.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again
here tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.